OK, this is Ron Shorn in Boulder, Colorado,
interviewing Rita F. Beebe on October 21, 1993.
Rita, for the record, could you give your full
name?
Rita Faye Jenkins Beebe. And when and where were
you born? In Pritchett, Colorado, October 10,
1936. How do you spell Pritchett?
P-R-I-T-C-H-E-T-T, but I don't believe it exists
anymore. Where did you get interested in
astronomy at the beginning?
I had a strange childhood. I grew up near Boulder,
Colorado. My father was 54 years old when I was
born. He was a cowpuncher in his younger days and
had settled into ranching and farming by the time I
came along. As a cowpuncher, he spent a
considerable number of winters with remittance
men in line shacks. And these people were people
who were very well-schooled dropouts from
Eastern culture in those days. My father's
interest having had only a third-grade
education, was in nature, and the knowledge he had
accumulated was that of a naturalist in the
old-fashioned sense. So I grew up believing
everybody knew about constellations and
everybody asked questions about stars. I had
mechanical tendencies and was frequently
accused of stealing my father's tools when he lost
them and that sort of thing and having no brothers
to compete with. I was allowed to develop my
interests. I developed sort of a two-pronged
interest in the fact that I also wanted to be an
artist, and I actually spent the first two years of
my college days majoring in art before I turned
back to the physical sciences. Where did you go to
undergraduate school? I went to art school at
Washburn University in Topeka, Kansas, and the
Kansas City Art Institute, and then returned to
Colorado University Why did you go to Kansas?
Fellowships. All right, so then you went back
after you left art school and went to? Colorado
University. Okay, in Boulder. Yes. And what did
you major in there? Chemistry. Chemistry. Why
chemistry? Because at that time I was going to be a
veterinarian, and I couldn't put the financial
package together for that. So then I moved into
teaching junior high school. Junior high school.
We went into an extensive curriculum
development, and I moved into teaching earth
science, and after three years of that, then I came
back to graduate school. Okay, when did you get
your bachelor's degree? Fifty-nine. Okay, and
when did you enter graduate school? In 62, I guess?
Yeah. Where did you go to grad school? Indiana
University. Why did you pick Indiana? Previous to
Indiana University, I went back to the University
of Idaho for two years to upgrade my physics and
mathematics. and then did a survey of graduate
schools. And I got married in 59. So that parallel
to my development, my husband was doing the same
thing. So we were going to enter graduate school
together. And we picked Indiana because they gave
us a double financial package that we needed. How
long did you stay at Indiana as a grad student? When
did you get out? 69. 69. What was your doctoral
dissertation and who was your The work was on R.
Cygnus, a red giant star with anomalous heavy
metal abundance. My thesis advisor was Benjamin
Franklin Peary.
Okay, so you got your Ph.D. in when? October of 69.
Okay, I covered that. So where did you go after
that? When did your husband get his degree? He got
his in September of 69. He got a position at New
Mexico State University as an assistant
professor in astronomy. I had worked as a graduate
student at Los Alamos, and at that time there were
not two jobs available. But I was well enough
established at Los Alamos that I could continue to
consult part-time. And we were working on
molecular opacities calculations. And that was
quite compatible. The New Mexico State
University gave me office space and computer
access free of charge. So it was quite a
comfortable arrangement. Okay. And what were you
working on there? I was interacting with the Los
Alamos group working on opacities. Then in
January of that year, I began to work with Brad
Smith. OK. How did that come about? Elmer Reese had
developed quite a few measurements of drift rates
of clouds in the atmosphere of Jupiter. And he had
lost his collaborator, Gordon Solberg, to
controversial political issues and needed some
assistance. So I started working just part time on
the Los Alamos situation and part time for Brad
Smith to help Elmer Reese with that
interpretation.
OK. How long did that happen? I mean, how long did
you stay in that position doing that kind of work?
After about a year. We wrote new proposals, and I
became fully funded in the study of Jupiter's
atmosphere and worked as a research associate
until 1974.
And what did you do research on until 1974? Jupiter
and Venus ground-based data. What kind of data?
Photographic. And what happened in 1974? 1974,
Brad Smith left New Mexico State, moved to the
University of Arizona, and I was selected to
replace him as a tender track assistant professor
of astronomy. And what's happened to your career
since then? We continued to study Jupiter, and in
1977, I joined the Voyager team to assist in the
targeting of the imaging and continue to work on
that project. Since Voyager wound down, what have
your interests been? I moved over to Hubble Space
Telescope. I've been principal investigator on
teams that are utilizing the WIFPIC planetary
camera mode and the faint object spectrograph to
do correlative studies of changes in wind fields
cloud wave formation and spectroscopic data when
you first got into planetary astronomy did you
feel that real quote unquote astronomers
considered its second rate
I have been known to say that I haven't experienced
sexual discrimination. I've experienced racial
discrimination. Yes, there has been a general
tendency to do that. I consider it a lack of ego on
their part. I think they feel grossly challenged
because when we attempt to do our work, we have
higher spatial resolution. We have more
information. Our physical interpretations are
frequently more sophisticated than theirs. Do
you think planetary astronomy is a little more
respected now than it was when you first got into
the game? Yes, I think so.
What was planetary astronomy like when you first
got into it? I mean, size, attitudes, the kind of
people that were in it as compared to now?
Actually, by the time I really started
participating in activities outside of New
Mexico State, there was a fair amount of
excitement about it.
I remember the second Division of Planetary
Sciences meeting was in Tallahassee.
I found that meeting extremely exciting. I found
another thing about it rather strange in the sense
that I encountered strange discrimination. I was
not allowed to buy my own drinks in that state at
that time as a female, although I was at that point
in time becoming recognized as a working
scientist. Culture hadn't caught up with it yet,
definitely. What's the best piece of work you've
done?
The
coordination, the targeting, and the
interpretation of Voyager 1 Jupiter encounter.
The really satisfying thing about that encounter
was, yes, we did know a lot about these clouds, and
yes, we did know how to find them. And much of the
work that we had done before that, that people felt
might be over-interpreting the limited
ground-based resolution, then became accepted.
So that in retrospect, we could go backward and put
even more physical constraints on the atmosphere
than the Voyager data itself allows. Did anything
about the Voyager information about Jupiter
surprise you?
I hadn't done a lot of consideration about the
magnetic field or the surface conditions of the
satellites before we arrived. Those were
surprising to me, and part of it was that I hadn't
pushed as hard as I probably should have in those
areas.
the atmospheric results, I would say satisfied
me. That was wonderful to see that much of what we
thought was true really was and to just gain higher
and higher resolution. Voyager 1 was wonderful
because we had almost 90 days of that trip in the
sense that every day I went in I was seeing a little
higher resolution, a little more of the
understanding. So it really was a wonderful
thing. I'll never live through another trip like
that. Have you had any dead ends or fiascos or
things that you wish you wouldn't have gotten
involved with? I wish I had the time back. that I
have spent trying to figure out what triggers
disturbances in Jupiter's atmosphere. I've
looked at almost every combination of
satellites, tides, all sorts of things, and every
one of them is just pulled up as a dead end. If I had
that time back, I'd probably do some very nice
stuff with it. Where was your first encounter with
National Aeronautics and Space Administration?
When did they first give you money or put you on a
board or something? 74. And that was? That was a
grant.
OK. All right. And you've had frequent contact
with NASA since then. Quite so. How do you think
they handle the management of planetary science
in general? My feeling is that the people who have
been managing my contracts are excellent. It's a
structure above that. And the
financial structures have become very
complicated. Gerard de Bacallure was very strong
in saying that he was really annoyed at the fact
that NASA would get some pretty pictures out of a
probe and then not support the follow-on
research, just cut things off. Did you find that
was true? I have aggressively worked to keep M.O.
and D.A. financed over the years. And yes, it's a
constant problem. And it's a real problem simply
because it is the one thing that can be delayed. So
that it's sitting there always vulnerable for any
sort of a taxation or a budget cut It's the one
that's sticking out in the wind ready to be clipped
off. And that's not just NASA. That happens
everywhere, in business and everywhere. You can
always delay the fine analysis of the project so
that it's just an ongoing problem. And people who
are involved in it will continually have to fight.
Where do you think planetary astronomy today
would be if it wasn't for the money that NASA put
into it in the last 30 years?
Well, I suppose it would still be back in the realm
of astrology, quite frankly. Because there
really was a huge resistance to letting it grow
academically. And that came not only from the
classical astronomers, but it also came from the
classical physicists. because it was their
territory that would be encroached in academia.
And without NASA, this area would have been
expected to exist in academia. There were several
big funding crunches in ASA history. One was in 73,
one was in 81, and it looks like we're getting
another one now. And things have been tight for a
number of years. When you get an intelligent
student They're intelligent students who say,
gee, I want to go into grad school and be a planetary
astronomer. What do you tell them now? Well, I have
a discussion with them about the potential, but my
own attitude, which I convey to them, is that if
they are good enough, they will probably be able to
survive in it. And quite frankly, if they wanted to
become an architect or any of the other applied
physical sciences where your real survival is
your own creativity, they'll have the same kind of
tough time. Now, if they're second rate, I will do
my best to encourage them to decide that they
really would rather do something else. There's
been some talk lately of turning NASA into the
National Aeronautics Administration and giving
space research to the Air Force, who already does a
lot. And of course, before there was an NSA, the Air
Force poured a lot of money into planetary
astronomy and related topics.
If that happened, would you mind working for the
Air Force? No.
Don't forget, I've already worked for Los Alamos.
I like the idea that there are a few intelligent
people working for the agencies who develop our
ability to go to war. I don't want that left to
people who are warriors by nature.
We're at the Division for Planetary Sciences of
the American Astronomical Society meeting, and
25 years ago, 26 years ago, there was no special
organization for planetary astronomy. And in
fact, there was no special journal for planetary
astronomy. And now there's Icarus and also the
Journal for Geophysical Research-Planet. Do you
think that this specialization has been good,
bad, indifferent, inevitable? What's your
opinion? I think the specialization has been
good. I think the fact that it's been recognized as
an area that should have been pursued and
developed has changed the basic attitude of
ordinary people. When you walk into an elementary
classroom or a group of freshman students, their
concept of their surroundings has been grossly
modified by the space program. and it's been
modified in a constructive way in the sense that
they have been able to see more than one planet.
They have seen things that are as spectacular as
science fiction can deliver to them, and they have
been introduced to the concept of cause and effect
in a very graphical way that has led them not only to
know that this sort of logic exists but to expect it
to expect there to be an explanation of the
spectacular since you've done both you're an
appropriate person to ask do you ever get annoyed
when some popular book or tv show claims that
spacecraft discovered everything we know about
the solar
system it doesn't bother me that much Because
quite honestly, spacecraft
has brought it to the attention of the public. I
certainly attempt to correct that over time. Do
you think that planetary astronomy is a part of
astronomy? Definitely. There's one other thing I
don't know. Astronomy is a part of NASA. The
traditional astronomy is by a very large part now
funded by NASA. The breakdown between NSF and NASA
is shocking to me. I mean, the entire field of
astronomy is now dependent for most of its support
from NASA. This came with the development of the
great observatory projects and that sort of
thing. Like the Hubble Space Telescope. The shift
is huge. NSF is supporting very little of the whole
astronomical academic community at this point.
Do you think that's good or bad? I think it's bad. I
think we've slid into a situation. Any time you
have federal funding for projects that are
pushing technology, the number of people in the
field will expand to the limit that those projects
can accept. And we've had this major expansion in
all of the areas. And it can't continue to expand.
The fact that we're suffering a budget crunch is
caused by many different aspects. And one is 25
years of expansion of these fields. Let me ask you,
how old do you consider planetary astronomy to be?
Because there's two schools of thought. One says
it didn't really begin until Galileo looked at the
sky with a telescope. And others would say, well,
it started back when the first Swiss lake dweller
looked at the sky and saw that Venus was this bright
thing in the sky after sunset. What's your
opinion? Actually, I think Planetary science, as
such, really started in the 50s. Before that, it
was a part of our natural science lore. And in the
1950s, people began to understand spectroscopy
enough to realize that they could do some very
significant remote sensing. They began to look
for general physical explanations. They began to
do detailed studies. A classical one is Kuiper's
study of trying to understand the red spot. A
beautiful study in the sense that, again, here was
the real realization that we could expand
ourselves, stretch ourselves, and really push
the concept of cause and effect.
To me, that was the point that the field that we call
planetary science, where we're really relating
other planets to the Earth instead of saying these
are wonderful things with some mystic properties
associated with them. We're saying these are
different cases of the same thing we have here. To
me, that's when planetary science, as I see
planetary science, began. Of all the discoveries
that have come about in the last 30 years, what Was
it really most astounding to you, the one that
you'd say, I never would have thought of that, or I
never would have believed that? The volcanoes on
Mars. There was just something wonderful about
them. I was ready to accept that Mars had never had
plate tectonics. But it had never occurred to me
that instead of plate tectonics, you would have
activity that just sat there and piled up. And that
concept is just neat. Do you think planetary
astronomers and planetary scientists have done a
good job in selling themselves, or as good a job as
they could have, to the public and to the Congress?
I think they've done an excellent job of selling
themselves to the public. I travel a lot. I'm on a
lot of committees. And if I'm on a plane and
somebody opens a conversation that I really don't
want to pursue, asking me what I do, I tell them I'm
an astrophysicist and that's the end of that
conversation. I tell them I work in planetary
science and the conversation will last until the
plane lands. I think that's a good measure of the
fact we've done it. Selling ourselves to
Congress. That's another question.
I think we have probably done a better job of that
than most of the other physical sciences.
What effect, if any, do you think on public
interest and funding is the fact that we found no
trace whatsoever of light anywhere in the solar
system, except in particular not on Mars?
I think that stimulated our funding during the
period of time that we were on our survey of the
solar system. We're now past that. I think it may
actually curtail our funding now because I think
what we have done with that is that we have made
people more aware that this is all we got and we
better save it. So I think in the long run, our
efforts have actually done a better job of selling
the need to really understand this planet as a
unit, so that we probably enhanced the area we now
refer to as our sciences.
How did planetary studies get started at New
Mexico State? In the 50s, Clyde W. Tombaugh, who
had moved to White Sands, At White Sands, he set up
tracking cameras for studying the ballistic
trajectories of various test rockets and that
sort of thing. And in the mid-50s, he decided that
he wanted to free himself up from some of the
details that he was forced to accept if he
continued to live at the White Sands Proving
Grounds. So he requested the right from the
military to move his contracts to New Mexico State
University, which was a small university. Its
research was very centered in the central office,
which would give him first-class service. So he
moved to New Mexico State. Among the people that he
had acquired to work with him at White Sands was
Frederick Smith. And after they moved to New
Mexico State, and the two of them worked as a team to
develop ground-based monitoring of basically
Mars when they first started, with an eye toward
understanding the seasonal aspects for space
exploration. And then later they acquired the
services of Elmer Rees, a gifted amateur
astronomer all of the right attributes to be an
outstanding observational scientist. Where did
they get the money to do this? At first it was Air
Force, and then they moved to NASA for
me. Were you the next hire that came along? No.
Clyde had a faculty slot in earth sciences. And he
expanded his contracts to the point that he had an
observing team, which I think he had as many as five
observers on staff at a time. I was the first PhD to
join his staff. And Clyde was still the PI of the
group when I joined, although he retired soon
after that, and Brad Smith became the PI. Now, what
happened then? I mean, what department were you
in? I was in earth science. And in 1969, the
astronomy separated from earth science and
became an individual department.
William Reitmeyer was the department head. And by
the time I arrived, there were three
stellar galactic type astronomers. And Herb
Beebe was the theoretician. He was actually a
solar astronomer. So the fact that the Sacramento
Peak Observatory was there was extremely
attractive to him, because he could do his
observing there and then do his modeling at the
university. Well, what's happened since then? I
mean, what's happened to the astronomy
department? Has it grown much? Over the years, we
attempted several times to set up an effective
consortium to build a large telescope. We have
managed to do that. University
of Chicago, Princeton University, University of
Washington and Washington State and New Mexico
State have developed a consortium. Recently,
Johns Hopkins and the Institute of Advanced
Studies at Princeton have come in. We have a 3 and 1
half meter honeycomb type Naismith-focused
telescope that will be coming online within the
next six months. It's now waiting for its
secondary. Everything else is in position and
tested. And it will be located, it is located at?
Apache Peak, which is 100 miles from the campus on
paved, maintained roads. And we have remote
observing capabilities. How many faculty do you
have now on the university campus? in the
astronomy department? We have two planetary
astronomers that are on tenure track. Myself is
tenured and we have a junior person who has been
with us for a year and a half. That's Mark Marley.
Then we have Jack Burns is our current department
head and he is a radio astronomer. Interacts
considerably with the VLA. Renee Walterbos
galactic astronomy. Walt Sanders and
Kurt Anderson, both stellar population galactic
structure types. Bernie McNamara, variable
stars, catastrophic variable stars.
That's the tenure track group. We have Bill Weber,
retired from New Hampshire, high energy
astrophysics. He's a university professor. Nick
Devereaux, a young NASA investigator, galactic
astronomy. Andre Klippen, the We have developed
an endowment in honor of Clyde Tombaugh, and
Andrei, a Soviet cosmologist, is our first
fellow.
Do you planetary types talk with the other
astronomers much? Oh, yes, yes. As a matter of
fact, The major thrust that's developing in
galactic astronomy at New Mexico State is
hydrodynamics.
Yes, because hydrodynamics is quite well
developed in planetary astronomy. Mark Marley is
quite interested in energy balance in the upper
atmosphere, and so am I. So the overlaps with the
Most newly acquired galactic people are open,
friendly, and very collaborative. Some of the
older traditional astronomers are still sitting
off in their stuffy corners, but they're
literally isolated from both sides now. Well,
Chris, do you have the advantage that you don't
just have a snapshot, which is all you get? Well,
you can actually see things changing on Jupiter,
which makes it a little more tricky to... make
predictions. Actually, our radio astronomers
can see things changing, too. These supersonic
jets change with time, too. So the concepts of
modeling and displaying time changes and that
sort of thing really do overlap. That brings me to
another point, which is that radio astronomy,
which is what I started out in, was really founded
not by astronomers but by engineers. And in the
50s, well, 40s and 50s, it had a hard time getting
started in this country because the astronomers
at the time had about the same attitude towards the
dirty engineering work as they did towards
looking at the planets. And radio astronomy has
never had a bias, as far as I know, against
planetary astronomy. How do you get along with the
radio astronomers now? because it's a new
generation of people. The old timers are mostly
gone. But I wanted your opinion on that. And many of
the numerics are so parallel. Around
the turn of this century, planetary astronomy was
still a significant part of astronomy. Henry
Norris Russell did papers on the atmosphere of
Venus and so forth. But by the end of World War I, it
was basically dead. I mean, there were a few people
still working, but it was basically dead. Who or
what killed it, in your opinion?
OK, thanks for your question.
And probably the lack of infrared observations
coming along at the right time. We really had a
dearth of new observational input.
And most of the interesting spectral features are
in the infrared, unfortunately. The development
of large telescopes that did not enhance our
spatial resolution sort of made the planets not
that desirable. And then the fact that we weren't
able to use those large light buckets to reach into
another frequency domain and give us some more
constraints is probably what really put it down.
Gerard de Baccalaure has a vehement two-word
answer to that question. Percival law. Do you
think that had an effect?
No, I don't. I think the fact that you see too many
bubbles of air, Earth's air, in a big telescope had
the biggest effect, because much of the money was
being recruited to support the big telescopes.
And we really weren't competitive on them. We
really couldn't pull new, exciting information
out. If the spatial resolution had been directly
proportional to the diameter of the telescope,
Percival Lowell couldn't have touched us. The
idea of what we would have seen on Mars would have
just been so intriguing that... I wanted to ask
you, this is a detail that may not get in the book,
but I want your opinion. You know, now with CCDs you
can beat the scene and take pictures of, in
particular Mars, that look like the sort of stuff
that those of us who have looked at Mars through
telescopes will occasionally see but could never
photograph or even draw. Were
you relieved to see that those images actually
were just like what you'd been seeing in the past?
Sure. The idea of being able to record and then go
back and analyze is always exciting. Sure, you
believe what you see. After you understand how the
human eye interprets things, you know that those
details are there. But you can't remember them.
You can't intercompare them. The classical
example of this is Elmer Rees, who had observed an
excellent observer. And when he was finally
allowed to have the A Mountain, the Tortugas
Mountain, photographic record, So he could go
back and see what a south equatorial belt storm
looked like in 71 and compare it to 75. It was like,
you know, manna from heaven.
One thing that's been a petty annoyance of mine,
and I wonder if it's been of yours, is that the
pictures they release of Mars and the whole disk
from various spacecraft don't look like it looks
when you look directly at it. They fiddle around
with the data. Does that kind of tick you off? Yes,
it kind of ticks me off. And there's a fair amount of
it going on now in ground base, too. High pass
filtering, edge finders being used to really
enhance the edge structures, total destruction
of the photometry. One of the things that bothers
me a little bit about the Voyager representation
of Jupiter is the fact that in order to get high
contrast images into the American living room, we
grossly enhance the color. And we have left the
public with a concept of the appearance of these
cloud decks. It's wrong. Lately, there's been a
fair amount of effort to make planetary science
practical, and there's certainly been a lot of
publicity about killer asteroids and comets, the
ozone layer, global warming. Do you think that's
gone too far, or do you think it's just about right,
or not enough? I think it's gone too far. I don't
think that that is the real application of
planetary science. I think that The real
application of planetary science in the field of
education is the idea of physical processes. More
than one laboratory to understand what has gone on
over time. developing the general understanding
of time dependence on Earth. We could do real
structures there. Killer asteroids is, I don't
think planetary people invented that. I think SDI
people invented that, looking for a home. And I
think that's appalling. I think it's misleading.
I think it's asking the American public to pay
attention to something that is not as likely to
happen as some of the other pending catastrophes
that we should be expending resources on.
What do you think is going to happen? Well, first of
all, do you think planetary astronomy is kind of
mined out now or not? No, I don't think so. I think
that,
well, I talk to elementary students a lot
Elementary students are ready to go to the moon,
even if they have to live in a hole. As long as I will
let them have television, they would love to go to
the moon. The concept of a 14-day day is
fascinating to them. Sixth graders would like to
take pregnant women to the moon so they can watch
the children grow up under low G.
It's this concept of just a little different
environment. I think we've still got a lot of very
interesting, stimulating stuff. And this is
aiming toward really improving education,
really improving the critical ability of the next
generation. Do you think there will be money to
support planetary astronomy in any significant
amount in the next few years? No, I think we're
headed toward a period of time where the support
really is going to decrease. And then I think that
maybe 20 years from now, we'll see an increase in
interest in it again, and it'll come back. I forgot
to ask you one thing about the situation in New
Mexico State. Now, it was a small college 30 years
ago.
How would you characterize the attitude of the
higher-ups there, you know, whatever they are,
the regents or the deans or the presidents or
chancellors, towards having, you know, a real
research group, and in particular astronomy?
Were they amazed that there was such a subject? No,
not at all, because the proper people of Pasadena
chased the Caltech people out of Arroyo Seque. to
the White Sands Proving Ground so that the
development of the space program is very closely
associated with New Mexico in the minds of most of
the people there. The first
satellite that was to go into Earth orbit that
didn't get off the launch pad carried a
communications package that had been built at New
Mexico State. New Mexico State has been very
strong in telemetry and communications, so that
we came in to this area from the technological
side, and the physical science was second to
develop there, but it was natural that it did
develop there. New Mexico State has a very large
involvement in military funding.
They entrapped process and deliver a large
portion of the data that's acquired at the White
Sands Missile Range.
You're undoubtedly aware of the fact that
astronomy is, I guess without, astronomy in
general and planetary astronomy in particular,
is the most popular science with the general
public. How come
Well, it's not quite as mundane as Earth-based
science. There's still a little bit of the
fascination of science fiction in it. But at the
same time, because people have been living on a
planet, they've got all the fundamental basis for
understanding it. So it's something that's
familiar but mind-stretching at the same time.
It's been my opinion that astronomy is the best
carrot that you can use as a teacher to get people to
learn science. Do you agree?
No. And elementary students like bugs just as
well. When does that start to change? About the
sixth grade. Any idea why?
I guess they get tired of bugs. When you've done
Grasshoppers 2, how far can you go?